---
layout: layouts/blob
title: "Being Turned Off: An Un_timely Lab"
author: nicole, ipek, johanna
icon: nails
iconlabel: 'Icon, purple fingers getting their nails done.'
---

![A rectangle in orange-pink gradient color, placed on it are a draggable file named ‘On Circlusion - Bini Adamczak’, an embedded youtube video entitled  'Turning a Sphere Inside Out,' a written text in bold saying ‘On Being Turned Off. An Un_timely Lab the re:coding algorithmic culture research project’ and  text underneath saying '20 – 27 April 2020. Through a_synchronous meetings (gatherings) we will practice story-telling, go for a walk in between different times, encounter unknown matters, and speculate on staying not-healthy.'](/img/being-turned-off-screenshot.png)

*On Being Turned Off* ran from April 20 - 27, 2020 \[click
[here](https://r-calc.net/beingturnedoff/) for its site\]. Both the
Kunsthochschule and University of Kassel, where our research group was
based, closed down on March 18, 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. When
we started preparing the lab in March, we already knew that it would
take place online only. We had been using online communication platforms
such as *Discord* and *Jitsi* (*Zoom* did not yet dominate academia) for
organizing our project, so we knew the various frustrations of online
formats. Many events were moving online out of necessity during that
time. We often experienced a disregard by the events' organizers for
what this shift means for the bodies sitting in front of the screens in
terms of privacy, in terms of access, and in terms of a complete lack of
crip sensibility for just how exhausting it is to continuously stare at
a screen for long spans of time with little to no breaks. So we
approached our lab with a focus on different modes of engagement – in
terms of timespan, demand of attention and communication-speed. In other
words, we wanted our lab to take place along different temporalities. We
developed a one page website for which we chose texts, videos, images
and sounds to be displayed at different times during the lab week. Many
of the included works dealt with concepts of time, touch, and the
ableisms embedded in the idea of \"staying healthy\". Throughout the
week the materials were repeated and reshuffled and we also
organized three 2 hour-long chat meetups. Participants could join
anonymously via an embedded chat interface while we as facilitators
would take on different roles: We staged materials live on the website
while people were watching, other times we structured the chat with
messages prepared in advance according to a specific choreography.

![](/img/being-turned-off-chat-note.png)

The following is a reflection of this lab, written five months after the
fact. Each of us three came up with questions we wanted to ask each
other, then we took turns answering.

 

**Say something about difficulties during the process of developing and
building the Un_timely Lab.**

![](/img/being-turned-off-stream.png)

I remember our work process as harmonious – despite the fact that it
was a massive amount of work and stress in a very short amount of time
for cooking up an event that spanned an entire week. Our *Discord*
server documents a four week preparation period, there simply was no
time for conflicts while we prepared and the staged the laboratory. In
retrospect there were many moments of friction where we should have
taken the time to take a step back and listen to each others needs and
imaginations. But I also need to say that I am super proud of what we
did, this project is one of the most beautiful and precise things I have
ever done.

  

Certainly one of the most demanding conditions of our collective process
was that it took place in an institutional situation intensely
structured by hierarchies, where individual work conditions differed
dramatically with regard to precarity or security: three people worked
collectively in an externally funded research project, with two of them
each employed through an 18 month contract on a 25% position of
'künstlerische Mitarbeiter\*innen' (artistic associate), and the third a
Professor with a Beamtin (civil servant) contract for life.

  

Plus, we had decided on an interactive, choreographed webpage, but only
one of us is versed in coding for web. So this was another massive
asymmetry, also with regard to different kinds of emotional labor, with
one person carrying the burden of responsibility for creating the
structure, and doing so in time, and the other two managing feelings of
guilt and staging hectic or tired efforts to compensate or ignore this
asymmetry. In many regards, more time and space would have been
necessary for translations between different needs, practices, and
knowledges.

 

**If you look back, what did you like most about our lab? And what did
you find most challenging?** 

For me, most challenging was what we called chat facilitation. I
remember every one of us was curious to investigate what a chat space
could be for the lab meetups. I myself was interested in this feeling of
presence, like the little indicator at the bottom of the chat window
saying \"there are 10 people in this space with you.\" Maybe this is
also what I liked most about our lab: this somewhat awkward but also
tranquil moment of being together. But then, what to do with all those
uncertainties of the chat format – that was the difficult part.

![](/img/being-turned-off-screen.png)

I would say the same, the most challenging aspect in our lab was the
chat facilitation, that was a tough learning experience. As a
facilitator with lots of experience in physical spaces I underestimated
how chat rooms have their own conventions which shape their
conversations. In other words, you cannot facilitate in contexts if you
do not know the communication conventions. That was a serious case of
academic over-estimation on my part. No one would think of facilitating
a university event if they have no idea about uni contexts.

 

Hmm\... what you are saying makes me go back to something we talked
about during our preparation: how in this huge online-shift institutions
started to use spaces in a certain way. They claimed these spaces as if
they belonged to them and they can behave in whatever way they want in
them – as if these spaces had not existed before. Art reviewers
‚discovered' games since you can play them online, unlike visiting
exhibitions, and they started to write game reviews of popular games.
The subnote and also the explicit tone of these reviews would be that
games are much cooler than contemporary art. How can they speak of games
as if they are one entity? Video Games have had diverse communities
since at least the 1980s.

 

I think what we did was very lecture-performance-like with a space for
interactivity. We developed our own method of doing the lab, and this
was of course challenging. We could have also used the academic
Zoom-method, which would have been super safe in terms of being able to
control everything and minimizing chances for unexpected things to
happen. But we were all not interested in that. With our method we also
managed to come up with something other than the usual frontal,
self-image-based form of conversation and its ableism. Since critiquing
ableisms was one of our main focuses, we also included a [video lecture
excerpt](https://www.youtube.com/embed/tYHSHRzj7eY?start=3494) of Erin
Manning explaining her methods of organizing a classroom space in a
non-normative way. However, the facilitating or the feeling of being a
facilitator was hard for me, and I found it especially hard to lead the
conversations into a specific direction. But I very much liked our
method of posting one picture or text in the chat as small input once in
a while and giving space for conversations to develop.

![](/img/being-turned-off-shapes.png)

Looking back what we did really feels like an experiment with digital
forms. Throwing somewhat weird things together, tweaking and seeing what
resonates with people in an attempt to invent something other than the
usual, very normative mapping of physical learning spaces into digital
realities. But I wonder how much of this came across at the other end of
the screen, for the people that were with us in the chat. I still got
the feeling that some people were just totally overwhelmed by what was
going on (myself included, sometimes), even though we did try to
encourage everyone to take their time. So what is the result of our
‚experiment', where would we go from here? Especially since we have
witnessed the normalization of Zoom as this catch-all environment with
its own ruleset emerging.

 

I think if we had had more time for expanding the three meetings and
stretching the time between them out over one and a half months for
example, that would have made the untimely effect stronger. In academic
contexts I often feel that the theories that are discussed are
not really convincing in practice, even though they are well thought
out. Maybe because of limits – limited time, limited money, limited
dedications and so on. In our lab I see tendencies to get to somewhere
else but I also see the existing limitations that didn't wholly allow
for this getting elsewhere.

 
![](/img/being-turned-off-lab.png)
etymonline.com/word/laboratory, visited August 25, 2020.

 

The term 'lab' tastes of contexts of experimentation, where people come
together and try things out - and also where participants might feel
invited to actively engage in experimentation versus passively
consuming. But there might be a dimension of kitsch involved our use of
the term. By this I mean that 'laboratory' also has a connotation of
serious scientific research: natural sciences, hard facts, objective
truths. For people coming from arts and design based research, as many
of us do, and even more so for people with a queer- and trans\*feminist,
decolonial and anti-ableist perspective, this usage of the term needs to
have an ironic footnote, since we all embrace the understanding that
knowledge is situated, and participate in problematizing universal truth
claims and demands for general objectivity. 

 

I like the term lab very much. Lab to me sounds like a place where
everyone can join and do stuff. I was a chemistry fan when I was younger
and I loved playing with those small tubes and such. So to me the term
is above all connected with trying things out. But when it is used in
art contexts, it forges a relation to the sciences, and although using
the term might be a good strategy for getting funding, often times those
two different contexts really don't fit together at all.

 

I really find it interesting that in the laboratory definition above it
says \"room or building set apart for scientific experiments\", and with
regard to our lab, we are actually talking about a webpage. Using 'lab'
creates this \*skeuomorphic\* quality. Skeuomorphism is a design concept
I know from the first iPhone interfaces or also from Windows Media
Player themes. It is the idea to make an abstract thing like an app
resemble some real-world counterpart in order to make it more
approachable for the user – like when media player apps copied button
layouts and the scrubbing function from old tape players. Or like when
you call the *Zoom* interface and infrastructure a \"digital
classroom\".

![](/img/being-turned-off-media.png)

(\*another-blobby-smiling-emoji\* but also when you imagine a chat room
as \"10 people are in this space with you").
 

![](/img/being-turned-off-skeuo.png)
interaction-design.org/literature/article/skeuomorphism-is-dead-long-live-skeuomorphism, visited August 25, 2020.

 

This also makes me wonder, how did the design of our lab page come
about? The page has elements which one can drag around and it functions
like a minature desktop inside one's actual desktop (so perhaps this is
a form of 'meta-skeuomorphism'). Here's another quote from that
Skeuomorphism page: "That trash can lets users drag stuff they didn't
want on their computers to an actual bin. You could move files to
folders (another real life equivalent)." And then it
mentions 'affordance', a term which refers to what an
object communicates to you that you can do with it. On our page there
were these draggable objects but there was nothing telling you what you
had to do, so you were free to move around. I like that actually, maybe
it could even have gone a bit further. Time or better the aspect of
untimeliness relates to this too, I think.

 

**What is the significance of "different times" and "a_synchronicity"?**

 

We created a structure of presentation where different elements followed
different temporal logics, or even, where participants could determine
their own viewing and reading pace. When [Persson Perry
Baumgartinger](https://tupviskom.net/gestaltung__sprache__geschlecht-begehren/)
taught at the Kunsthochschule Kassel, he said that in his experience
slowing down is the most useful tool for creating anti-ableist learning
spaces. During the lab I myself became very aware of the existence of
different needs with regard to taking one's time or enjoying being
speedy, and how these different temporal needs are quite violently
denied by a uniform understanding of time and its enormously
exclusionary potential. So we slowed down. I myself am a fast reader, I
talk and type fast, so for slowing down during the chat sessions, I
started to sit on my hands and I bit on my tongue, quite painful at
times.

 

**Can you talk a bit about how and why you quoted / staged /
repeated other people's work during the lab.** 

 

I will actually shift your question onto another focus, one that we
intensely discussed during our preparation: the question of if and how
we would pay people for using their work. There was no money for this
kind of expense, since the terms of our *Volkswagen Stiftung* grant did
not allow for paying honorary fees. We had to scrounge that money from
elsewhere. So, our decision was that work already online on large
platforms can be quoted or referenced but work given to us via
permission by artists had to be compensated with at least a symbolic
amount of money. 

 

This was a central point during the preparations, our discussions around
quoting, embedding, crediting and honorarium. But I would say that it
was a lot more fuzzy than you're writing. The budget we had for external
contributions to this lab was just 200 - 300 €, in my opinion too little
to cover multiple honorary fees. I still believe it was great that we
tried to feature other work and pay at least a symbolic amount of money.
Nevertheless it continues to be a sore point for me that we did not have
more time to discuss and communicate our decisions on screening fees. As
someone who has worked in many festival context both on the side of the
organizer and the side of the contributor, this is unfortunately
something I am quite familiar with.

I would also add that at least there are screening fees for artists
whereas there is no such thing as a screening fee for academic texts.
Imagine what this means, materially, for freelance theorists who work
under precarious working conditions. So, for our discussion around
reimbursing authors for staging or quoting their work I found the
question ‚is this an academic or an artist?' irrelevant. I tried to find
out instead if the person whose work we wanted to include has a job that
gives them a regular income, or if a particular work was produced under
fair working conditions.

I think this is a good point, to consider the circumstances under which
the work was produced. I also ask these kinds of questions in the field
of music or any other kind of art form. For me, it is important to ask
if a work was produced by a person in a more privileged position. At
this point I want to talk about open access rather than discussing
personal credits in terms of either money or referencing the author. The
latter direction means to defend copyrights and I disagree with that at
this point. Also, artist/screening fees are almost non-existent usually,
if you are not very successful already. As with academic quoting
conventions, getting screened mostly just means cultural capital which
enables exploitation. It feels weird to be in that position of the
organizer, but I think it was quite OK what we did considering our
minimal budget.

**We hosted our lab at the beginning of a pandemic, now we are probably
more in the middle of it. I think we picked up some essential issues
such as questions around what it means to "stay healthy" (or not). What
would you do differently if we developed the workshop now, what has
changed meanwhile (if at all)?**

 

Back in April I got the feeling that our lab participants valued this
collective coming together right at a moment where lots of uncertainties
were looming. But over the months I felt a sort of online-attrition set
in and I wonder if people now would just feel exhausted by *another*
chat interface and *another* online meetup. But to answer the first
question, I probably would not have made it an online event at all.
Maybe rather an invitation to not stare at a laptop-screen for 10 hours
and go somewhere else instead.

![](/img/being-turned-off-mask.png)

One of the things we picked up was that everywhere this phrase of 'stay
healthy/bleib gesund' cropped up. And I remember one moment on
an activist mailing list where someone rebutted: „Just shut up, I am not
healthy, I have a chronic disease so consider the emotional effects of
your ableist thoughtlessness." Another important impulse for me was to
invent something for people to have a sense of togetherness, at least
for a short moment in time. And we chose to include Jonathan Richman's
[*I was am dancing in the Lesbian
Bar*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XjFU98mEem4) - also as a
bittersweet reminder that a lot of queer spaces were hit the hardest
with regard to economic survival.

![](/img/being-turned-off-stay.png)

This is a message that Vodaphone sent to my Nokia 6320i mobile phone,
and I can't turn this off so I have to stare at it whenever I need to
use the phone.

 

I was thinking about what you both were writing about online spaces. I
am a person who likes to meet online. I have no problem with that. And
even I would not like to do a workshop online now. My impression is a
canon emerged from these online meetings, and that is not something I am
enthusiastic about anymore. For a short time I thought that I can join
online events all over the world. So I joined a few workshops in London.
I felt quite uncomfortable, almost like an alien. I didn't understand
the language and also not the context of the people who were first
language English speakers. So an online workshop is not a utopia, but
like any other space it is shaped by existing structures of domination,
and you have to discuss how this is so specifically and what to do about
it, specifically.

![](/img/being-turned-off-clap.png)

–––––––––––––

 

This text was written by\... \[links to websites\]

It uses \[Mutant Standard emoji\](https://mutant.tech), which are
licensed under a \[Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
4.0 International
License\](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/). 

![](/img/being-turned-off-code.png)