---
layout: layouts/blob
title: World Wide Wet
author: Isi
icon: shark
iconlabel: 'Icon of a shark.'
---

## 0. Metaphor, Material
The dominant metaphor for online internet data is the cloud, which is often depicted as a white or blue icon with rounded edges. Not only its color – have you ever seen a blue cloud? – is surprising. With 99% of all internet traffic being transmitted through submarine communications cables on the ground of the Earth’s oceans (Starosielski: 2015), I am arguing that the visual and conceptual metaphor of the blue cloud follows what media scholar Jean-François Blanchette calls „the trope of immateriality“. This trope stands for the assumption that digital media, specifically bits, are supposedly independent from storage media and thus immaterial. In frictional relation with this trope, this article follows embodied computing practices and is invested in the wet, wired and weird workings of submarine communications cables. Calling on vaseline, rubber, worms and sharks, I am more interested in surfing this World Wide Wet than other WWWs. By taking a deep dive into the lower layers of the network stack, and by tracing the violences of the colonial internet, I will be arguing for an understanding of internet connectivity through two main modes: friction, and access as frictional.

## 1. An intro from the bottom of the ocean
If you are reading this article on a website or have downloaded it, the data packages called bits that make up its materiality will have traveled through submarine cables that are surrounded by vast amounts of water. About 1.2 million kilometres of submarine cables span the globe (Brake 2019: 02) and the bits they transfer are produced and processed by a huge amount of computational devices.

Media scholar Jean-François Blanchette critiques that bits have been discussed mostly along „the trope of immateriality“, meaning that they have been depicted as independent from any particular material instances, and even „free from“ what Katherine Hayles describes as the „[…] constraints that govern the material world“ (Hayles 1999: 13, in Blanchette 2011: 1043). As an example for this trope, Blanchette quotes Barlow’s 1996 A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace in which the author falsely predicted that corporations would have no power in cyberspace exactly due to the supposed immateriality of bits: „Your legal concepts of property, expression, identity, movement, and context do not apply to us. They are all based on matter, and there is no matter here.“ (Barlow 1996, in Blanchette: 1043) To build his counter argument, Blanchette follows bits through the computing stack and concludes that bits „cannot escape the material constraints of the physical devices that manipulate, store, and exchange them.“ (Blanchette 2011: 1042) Formulated differently: The fact that you are reading this article on a different computer than it was written on is due to abstraction processes that allow bits to traverse temporal-spatial arrangements while still leaving traces and consuming energy. I’m quoting Blanchette for his rigorous critique and naming of the trope of immateriality. However, instead of following his rhetoric of „escape“ and „constraints“ of materiality, I work with an understanding of computation as embodied and both painfully and joyfully so. In my conceptualization of internet infrastructure I include materials and species that are not traditionally considered parts of networks. In this other-configuration, I seek potentials for re-making internet and follow what Orit Halpern describes as the „sensory, or aesthetic aspect“ of data (2015: 37).


## 2. Slippery Misconceptions: Petroleum Jelly and the Softness of the Internet
In admiration of Bini Adamczak’s concept of circlusion, an „antonym of penetration“ that describes „pushing something – a ring or a tube – onto something else – a nipple or a shaft“ (Adamczak: 2016), I am not only asking how to render all elements of an encounter active, but am turning my attention towards the leaky substances that circlude, connect and insulate devices of electromagnetic transmission. Keeping electromagnetic current in place or moving it along defined lines requires more than a single artefact’s material boundaries: A cable’s electric current gets lost when it is in touch with salt water. To prevent this so called ‚leakage‘, the material petroleum jelly coats the wires of submarine cables. This semi-solid, translucent substance is commonly known as vaseline. Insoluble in water, it surrounds the cable’s optical fibres as a final protective layer. Petroleum jelly is, according to the company Vaseline „a naturally-occurring byproduct of the oil drilling process“. 
On their website, the company gives insight into the early marketing strategies of its founder, Robert Augustus Chesebrough who traveled the state of New York in the 1870ies to publicly and repeatedly burn his skin and treat it with „Wonder Jelly“. Petroleum jelly is a material of boundaries: It sits on burned and opened skin, has a noteworthy history as a (nowadays contested) lubricant, and it is an elemental protective layer between fibre optics and the copper tube surrounding them, which makes it a core material in performing today’s internet. Vaseline binds and slips between different fields of practice such as extractive industries, internet communications, skin care and sex. If what keeps the current flowing in submarine cables is the same material that softens skin, I suggest to not describe the internet as only „hard wired“, but also as „softly coated“. 


## 3. Gutta Percha
The outer layer of today’s submarine communication cables consists of polyethylene, which is also a product of the oil industries. When the first working telegraph was presented in 1839, this plastic had not been invented yet. To communicate over large distances and water masses, a good insulator to avoid leakage was needed – and found in the rubber-like material gutta percha. Harvested from the plant Palaquium gutta, this material came to the attention of colonizers in Singapore. Gutta percha’s insulating properties improve under the harsh conditions of the ocean, such as temperature and pressure. The shared histories and presents of submarine cables and rubber are intertwined with colonial violence: Soon mass produced on colonial plantations, gutta percha made it possible for colonizers to lay telegraph cables between their shores and colonized lands. This deepened the control that colonizers had over colonized lands, as they could coordinate control through almost real-time communications. In India „The colonial administration turned the telegraph into an instrument of control over territories, commerce, information, and above all, colonized people.“ (Thorat 2019: 260) While people in the colonies were forced to produce the materials needed for telegraphy, the new technology was described as „metaphorically attached to a newly disembodied consciousness“ by „annihilating space and time“ (Rosenheim 1977: 93 in Blanchette 2011: 1043) in the West.
This illusion of disembodiment crumbled slightly when people in the West were confronted with the olfactory evaporations of factories: As Berlin’s monument data base explains, a factory in Kreuzberg that produced gutta percha coatings for submarine cables was despised by local residents for the smells it released. I am calling on gutta percha here to argue that the trope of immateriality is a colonial knowledge project.

These are not matters of the past: Present visual representations of the distribution of submarine cables on the globe such as TeleGeography’s submarinecablemap.com show that the majority of cables connect Europe, North America and East Asia. A cable running near a country doesn’t mean the country has access to the internet, as Thorat points out in her previously referenced 2019 article Colonial Topographies of Internet Infrastructure: The Sedimented and Linked Networks of the Telegraph and Submarine Fiber Optic Internet. Even when focusing on landing stations as the places where cables come to shores, the example of Djibouti is a transit point connecting 50 states via 12 cables in a country in which only 18.5% of people have access to the internet (Thorat 2019: 270). Access to internet infrastructure is distributed unequally.

## 4. Wormy Weathers: Teredo’s Taste for Cables in More-Than-Human Infrastructures
In her text Mediating Animal-Infrastructure Relations Lisa Parks involves nonhuman animals in her conceptualization of infrastructure and critiques that they are usually not considered „part of infrastructural materialities“. Following osprey, a species of large birds that build nests on cell towers and sometimes even cause what is called „avian delays“ in the tower’s maintenance, she writes: „[…] infrastructures are surrounded by biomatter, from roots beneath them to fungi on top of them to wildlife around them.“ (Parks 2019: 144)

In case of submarine cables, it is the mollusc Teredo, often referred to as „the shipworm“ (Parkes and Keeble 2016: 239) that eats at simple conceptions of an enclosed and stable internet. Teredo has historically complicated marine warfare by boring holes into wood: Some scholars make its tiny, rasp-like teeth responsible for sinking the Spanish Armada in 1588 (Hoppe: 2002). By eating, Teredo makes materials such as wood porous. With the first submarine cables, Teredo developed an appetite for gutta percha. In today’s optical fibre cables, as Parkes and Keeble explain, the worms create electrical short circuits when hollowing through a submarine cables’ outer layers. Throughout its life and depending on water temperature, Teredo self-fertilizes and iterates between what biologists call female and male phases. Teredo doesn’t just circlude cables, it eats through them. When queering the World Wide Wet and hollowing power relations, Teredo is a superstar.

Another animal involved with submarine cables are sharks. Sharks are playful beings that take delight in electromagnetic currents, and have been filmed biting and moving submarine cables. Compared to ship anchors or underwater landslides, shark bites are a relatively small problem for the submarine industries, yet Google announced to surround new cables with a Kevlar-like material, which is usually used as a textile for bullet protection. 

As Lisa Parks argues and the actions of molluscs and sharks affirm: „[…] the infrastructural then, is not a given, it is constituted through dynamic and hybrid materializations, which becomes most intelligible to us in instances of entanglement, relationality, and intra-action“ (Parks 2019: 149). Considering animals as parts of internet infrastructure makes it possible to learn from their non-compliancy and their queering practices too: The materials that make internet infrastructure are part of the games and digestion of nonhuman animals such as sharks and worms, as well as human skin care routines.

## 5. Access and Friction, Access as Friction
To encounter the trope of immateriality in its colonial entanglements, I am turning to Anna Tsing who engages rubber as an example to explain her concept of friction. She writes: ‚Industrial rubber is made possible by the savagery of European conquest, the competitive passions of colonial botany, the resistance strategies of peasants, the confusion of war and technoscience, the struggle over industrial goals and hierarchies, and much more that would not be evident from a teleology of industrial progress. It is these vicissitudes that I am calling friction.’ (Tsing 2011: 06) Instead of telling a history of the internet as technoscientific progress, I am arguing that frictional imaginaries are needed: The stickiness of the tree sap of the 88 million gutta percha trees chopped in the making of the telegraph network (Tully 2009:575 in Thorat 2019: 261), the softness of the vaseline surrounding the cables and the electrical shortcuts caused by the tiny teeth of the mollusc Teredo.

Friction is also a key term in Aimi Hamraie and Kelly Fritsch’ Crip Technoscience Manifesto. The manifesto quotes an earlier text of Fritsch on access as etymologically linked to connection and attack: „the etymology of the word access reveals two frictional meanings: access as “an opportunity enabling contact,” as well as “a kind of attack”“ (Fritsch 2016: 23 in Hamraie & Fritsch 20: 10). Positioning „access-making as a site of political friction“ (ebd.), the authors analyse how disabled people creatively deal with policies and laws that aim to assimilate them into normative space. Hamraie and Fritsch show that access is frictional, never innocent, and often made possible through non-compliance. Access to the internet is frictional, as it cannot be untangled from the colonial violences that made and sustain it. While Tsing's understanding of friction, as it „produces movement, action, affect“ is helpful when analysing the material and labor interdependencies in global submarine cable networks, it is Hamraies and Fritsch’s positioning of access as friction that allows for a reading of access to and within internet infrastructures as both contact enabling and assimilatory.

## 6. Summary
In this conceptualization of the internet as an infrastructural performance of materials and animals I hope to have questioned current limits of the trope of immateriality. By showing that submarine cables carry colonial repercussions and control more than electromagnetic currents, I am arguing that the dimensions of decoloniality and embodiment are key to a contemporary critique of this trope. My involvement of materials such as petroleum jelly and gutta percha is not a link to any presumed stability of the material world, but instead an investigation of how these materials themselves are in friction with the way that the internet is commonly imagined. I wish for the heat that emerges in this friction to forge new connections between the copper corpses of the old telegraph cables that lie forgotten on the ocean floor and the disembodied metaphor of the cloud. 


### Literature

Adamczak, Bini. „on circlusion“, Mask Magazine, 2016: http://www.maskmagazine.com/the-mommy-issue/sex/circlusion (last clicked on 30.03.2020)

Blanchette, Jean-François. „A Material History of Bits”, Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 62, no. 6 (June 2011): 1042–1057.

Brake, Doug. „Submarine Cables: Critical Infrastructure for Global Communications“, Information Technology & Innovation Foundation, 2019

Halpern, Orit. „Cloudy architectures.“ continent. 4.3 (2015): 34-45.

Hamraie, Aimi, and Kelly Fritsch. „Crip technoscience manifesto“ In: Catalyst: Feminism, Theory, Technoscience 5.1 (2019): 1-33.

Hoppe K.N. „Teredo Navalis — the Cryptogenic Shipworm“ In: Leppäkoski E., Gollasch S., Olenin S. (eds) Invasive Aquatic Species of Europe. Distribution, Impacts and Management. Springer, Dordrecht, 2002

Parkes, Larry, and Alan Keeble. „The Teredo worm and subsea umbilicals: Risks and recommendations.“ Underwater Technology 33.4 (2016): 239-243.

Parks, Lisa. „Mediating Animal-infrastructure Relations.“ In: Being Material, edited by S. Helmreich, M. Boucher, and R. Uchill (2019): 141-53.

Starosielski, Nicole. „The undersea network“, Duke University Press, 2015

Submarine Cable Map. TeleGeography, https://www.submarinecablemap.com (last accessed on 26.10.2020)

Thorat, Dhanashree. „Colonial Topographies of Internet Infrastructure: The Sedimented and Linked Networks of the Telegraph and Submarine Fiber Optic Internet.“ South Asian Review 40.3 (2019): 252-267.

Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt. „Friction: An ethnography of global connection“, Princeton University Press, 2011

Vaseline. http://www.vaselinearabia.com/en/article/vaseline-history.html (last accessed on 30.03.2020)
